# typeorm-linq-repository
Wraps TypeORM repository pattern and QueryBuilder using fluent, LINQ-style queries.

## What's New
I am very pleased to anounce lots of new functionality in version 1.0.0-alpha.11!

### Latest Changes

As of version 1.0.0-alpha.14:

* No need to extend your repositories from abstract class `RepositoryBase`! `RepositoryBase` has been renamed to `LinqRepository` and is no longer abstract. That means you can simply create a repository as follows:

```ts
import { LinqRepository } from "typeor-linq-repository";
import { User } from "../entities/User";

const userRepository: LinqRepository<User> = new LinqRepository(User);
```

Note that, for backwards compatibility, `RepositoryBase` is an alias of `LinqRepository` and may still be imported.

* Fixed date comparison.

* Lazy loaded relationships are now supported in joins/includes.

As of version 1.0.0-alpha.11, the following features have been added:

* Joined properties in `where`, `and`, and `or`
* Grouped (bracketed) WHERE, AND, and OR clauses
* Left joins (whereas only inner joins and left joins with select (includes) were previously supported)
* Case matching options for string comparisons

### Older Changes:

As of version 1.0.0-alpha.9, the constructor for `RepositoryBase` may accept a `RepositoryOptions` object to override default behavior when setting up a repository. Examples of `RepositoryOptions` may be to specify a specific TypeORM connection to get or to indicate that the `id` property of an entity is not an auto-generated primary key. The `id` property is assumed to be auto-generated by default and, unless instructed otherwise, is set to `undefined` during creation to aid in auto-generation of the `id` property.

As of version 1.0.0-alpha.5, entities are no longer required to implement a numeric auto-generated ID as their keys. However, in order to use the `getById()` method, the entity must implement a property named `id` that is either a number or a string.

As of version 1.0.0-alpha.1, inner queries are now supported! That is, you may perform the equivalent of `WHERE "entity"."id" <IN/NOT IN> (SELECT ...)` using `typeorm-linq-repository`.

Additionally, inner joins are made more intuitive and foreign entities may also be joined for more complex relational joining.

Creating, updating, and deleting entities is also easier. The `createOne()`, `createMany()`, `persistOne()`, `persistMany()`, `removeOne()`, and `removeMany()` have been replaced by `create()`, `update()`, and `delete()`, respectively. Each takes either an entity or an array of entities and returns the appropriate result; `delete()` can also take the ID of an entity and perform a simple delete using that ID rather than the entity itself.

## Foreword
This is a work in progress. This project is currently in alpha and should be treated as such. That being said, it is finally receiving a massive update after six months of inactivity, so I hope it will continue to see lots of use and continue to mature.

`typeorm-linq-repository`'s queries handle simple includes, joins, and join conditions very well and now has the capability to take on more complex queries. The only way it will continue to mature is to have its limits tested see some issues and pull requests come in.

`typeorm-linq-repository` has been tested with Postgres and MySQL, but since TypeORM manages the ubiquity of queries amongst different database engines, it should work just fine with all database engines. Please feel free to give it a try and provide as much testing as possible for it!

## Prerequisites
[TypeORM](https://github.com/typeorm/typeorm "TypeORM"), a code-first relational database ORM for typescript, is the foundation of this project. If you are unfamiliar with TypeORM, I strongly suggest that you check it out.

TypeORM has changed a lot since this project's conception; as such, the legacy version of this library is now completely unsupported. This project will continue to stay up-to-date with TypeORM's changes.

## Installation
To add `typeorm-linq-repository` and its dependencies to your project using NPM:

```
npm install --save typeorm typeorm-linq-repository
```

## Linq Repository
`LinqRepository` is the repository that is constructed to interact with the table represented by the entity used as the type argument for the repository.

`LinqRepository` takes a class type representing a TypeORM model as its constructor argument.

```ts
import { LinqRepository } from "typeorm-linq-repository";
import { User } from "../../entities/User";

const userRepository: LinqRepository<User> = new LinqRepository(User);
```

## Base Repository
`RepositoryBase` is now an alias for the renamed `LinqRepository` for backwards compability. Previously, you had to extend a repository class from the abstract `RepositoryBase` in order to construct your repository.

For example:

`IUserRepository.ts`
```typescript
import { IRepositoryBase } from "typeorm-linq-repository";
import { User } from "../../entities/User";

export interface IUserRepository extends IRepositoryBase<User> {
}
```

`UserRepository.ts`
```typescript
import { RepositoryBase } from "typeorm-linq-repository";
import { User } from "../entities/User";
import { IUserRepository } from "./interfaces/IUserRepository";

export class UserRepository extends RepositoryBase<User> implements IUserRepository {
    public constructor() {
        super(User);
    }
}
```

### Repository Options
To modify default behavior when setting up a repository, use `RepositoryOptions`.

Repository options include:

`autoGenerateId`: A boolean value indicating whether the entity implements a property named `id` that is auto-generated. Default is `true`.
`connectionName`: The name of the TypeORM database connection to use to create the repository.

```typescript
import { RepositoryBase } from "typeorm-linq-repository";
import { Entity } from "../entities/Entity";
import { IEntityRepository } from "./interfaces/IEntityRepository";

export class EntityRepository extends RepositoryBase<Entity> implements IEntityRepository {
    public constructor() {
        super(Entity, {
            // This entity has a property named "id" that is not an auto-generated primary key.
            autoGenerateId: false,
            // Get the repository from a specific connection.
            connectionName: "connection-name"
        });
    }
}
```

### Injecting RepositoryBase
Protip: You can easily make `RepositoryBase` injectable! For example, using InversifyJS:

```typescript
import { decorate, injectable, unmanaged } from "inversify";
import { RepositoryBase } from "typeorm-linq-repository";

decorate(injectable(), RepositoryBase);
decorate(unmanaged(), RepositoryBase, 0);
decorate(unmanaged(), RepositoryBase, 1);

export { RepositoryBase };
```

## Using Queries
`typeorm-linq-repository` not only makes setting up repositories incredibly easy; it also gives you powerful, LINQ-style query syntax.

### Retrieving Entities
You can query entities for all, many, or one result:

```typescript
 // Gets all entities.
this._userRepository.getAll();

// Gets many entities.
this._userRepository
    .getAll()
    .where(u => u.admin)
    .isTrue();

// Gets one entity.
this._userRepository
    .getOne()
    .where(u => u.email)
    .equal(email);

// Finds one entity using its ID.
this._userRepository.getById(id);
```

### Type Safe Querying
This LINQ-style querying really shines by giving you type-safe includes, joins, and where statements, eliminating the need for hard-coded property names in query functions.

This includes conditional statements:

```typescript
this._userRepository
    .getOne()
    .where(u => u.email)
    .equal(email);
```

As well as include statements:

```typescript
this._userRepository
    .getById(id)
    .include(u => u.posts);
```

If the property `posts` ever changes, you get compile-time errors, ensuring the change is not overlooked in query statements.

### Multiple Includes
You can use `include()` more than once to include several properties on the query's base type:

```typescript
this._userRepository
    .getById(id)
    .include(u => u.posts)
    .include(u => u.orders);
```

### Subsequent Includes and Current Property Type
Include statements transform the "current property type" on the Query so that subsequent `thenInclude()`s can be executed while maintaining this type safety.

```typescript
this._userRepository
    .getById(id)
    .include(u => u.orders)
    .thenInclude(o => o.items);
```

```typescript
this._userRepository
    .getById(id)
    .include(u => u.posts)
    .thenInclude(p => p.comments)
    .thenInclude(c => c.user);
```

You can use `include()` or `thenInclude()` on the same property more than once to subsequently include another relation without duplicating the include in the executed query.

```typescript
this._userRepository
    .getById(id)
    .include(u => u.posts)
    .thenInclude(p => p.comments)
    .include(u => u.posts)
    .thenInclude(p => p.subscribedUsers);
```

### Filtering Results
Queries can be filtered on one or more conditions using `where()`, `and()`, and `or()`. Note that, just as with TypeORM's QueryBuilder, using `where()` more than once will overwrite previous `where()`s, so use `and()` and `or()` to add more conditions.

```typescript
this._userRepository
    .getAll()
    .where(u => u.isActive)
    .isTrue()
    .and(u => u.lastLogin)
    .greaterThan(date);
```

Note also that this caveat only applies to "normal" where conditions; a where condition on a join is local to that join and does not affect any "normal" where conditions on a query.

```typescript
this._postRepository
    .getAll()
    .join((p: Post) => p.user)
    .where((u: User) => u.id)
    .equal(id)
    .where((p: Post) => p.archived)
    .isTrue();
```

### Joined Properties in Comparisons
It is possible to join relationships on the fly during a conditional clause in order to compare a relationship's value.

```typescript
this._postRepository
    .getAll()
    .where(p => p.date)
    .greaterThan(date)
    .and(p => p.user.id)
    .equal(userId);
```

In order to join through collections in this fashion, use the `Array.map()` method.

```typescript
this._userRepository
    .getAll()
    .where(u => u.posts.map(p => p.comments.map(c => c.flagged)))
    .isTrue();
```

Note: If not already joined via one of the available `join` or `include` methods, relationships joined in this fashion will be joined as follows:

* `where()` and `and()` result in an `INNER JOIN`.
* `or()` results in a `LEFT JOIN`.

### Grouped (Bracketed) Conditional Clauses
In order to group conditional clauses into parentheses, use `isolatedWhere()`, `isolatedAnd()`, and `isolatedOr()`.

```typescript
this._userRepository
    .getOne()
    .where(u => u.isAdmin)
    .isTrue()
    .isolatedOr(q => q
        .where(u => u.firstName)
        .equals("John")
        .and(u => u.lastName)
        .equals("Doe")
    ).isolatedOr(q => q
        .where(u => u.firstName)
        .equals("Jane")
        .and(u => u.lastName)
        .equals("Doe")
    );
```

### Comparing Basic Values
The following query conditions are available for basic comparisons:

`beginsWith(value: string)`: Finds results where the queried text begins with the supplied string.

`contains(value: string)`: Finds results were the queried text contains the supplied string.

`endsWith(value: string)`: Finds results where the queried text ends with the supplied string.

`equal(value: string | number | boolean)`: Finds results where the queried value is equal to the supplied value.

`greaterThan(value: number)`: Finds results where the queried value is greater than the supplied number.

`greaterThanOrEqual(value: number)`: Finds results where the queried value is greater than or equal to the supplied number.

`in(include: string[] | number[])`: Finds results where the queried value intersects the specified array of values to include.

`isFalse()`: Finds results where the queried boolean value is false.

`isNotNull()`: Finds results where the queried relation is not null.

`isNull()`: Finds results where the queried relation is null.

`isTrue()`: Finds results where the queried boolean value is true.

`lessThan(value: number)`: Finds results where the queried value is less than the supplied number.

`lessThanOrEqual(value: number)`: Finds results where the queried value is less than or equal to the supplied number.

`notEqual(value: string | number | boolean)`: Finds results where the queried value is not equal to the supplied value.

`notIn(exclude: string[] | number[])`: Finds results where the queried value intersects the specified array of values to exclude.

`inSelected()` and `notInSelected()` are also available and are covered later in this guide.

### String Comparison
When comparing strings, the default behavior is to not match case (case-insensitive comparison).

If a case-sensitive comparison is desired, use the `matchCase` option when executing a comparison.

```ts
// Perform a case-sensitive comparison rather than the default case-insensitive.
equal(value, { matchCase: true });
```

Note that, due to a lack of type reflection in JavaScript, the opposite is true for comparing values with joined entities. See the Comparing Values With Joined Entities section below.

### Inner Joins
Filter joined relations by using `where()`, `and()`, and `or()` on inner joins using `join()` and `thenJoin()`.

```typescript
this._userRepository
    .getAll()
    .join(u => u.posts)
    .where(p => p.archived)
    .isTrue();

this._userRepository
    .getOne()
    .join(u => u.posts)
    .where(p => p.flagged)
    .isTrue()
    .and(p => p.date)
    .greaterThan(date);
```

Just as with `include()` and `thenInclude()`, `join()` always uses the query's base type, while `thenJoin()` continues to use the last joined entity's type.

```typescript
this._postRepository
    .getAll()
    .join(p => p.user)
    .where(u => u.id)
    .equal(id)
    .thenJoin(u => u.comments)
    .where(c => c.flagged)
    .isTrue()
    .join(p => p.comments)
    .thenJoin(c => c.user)
    .where(u => u.dateOfBirth)
    .lessThan(date);
```

### Left Joins
As the above `join()` and `thenJoin()` perform an `INNER JOIN`, desired results may be lost if you wish to not exclude previously included results if the joined relations fail the join condition. Filter joined relations while not excluding previously included results by using `joinAlso()` and `thenJoinAlso()` to perform a `LEFT JOIN` instead.

### Regarding Included Relationships
Note that `.include()` and `.thenInclude()` are not intended to work the same way as `.join()`, `.joinAlso()`, `.thenJoin()`, and `.thenJoinAlso()` in conjunction with `.where()`.

That is, using `.include().where()` does NOT behave the same way as `.join().where()` (interpreted in "plain English" as "join where").

`.include()` and `.thenInclude()` were meant to stand alone in their own context rather than filtering the main entity based on joined relationships.

For example:

```ts
this._userRepository
    .getMany()
    // I want to include posts in my results, but I am filtering included posts without filtering user results.
    .include(u => u.posts)
    // However, I am also filtering on the user itself (.where() after .include() filters on the base type).
    .where(u => u.active)
    .isTrue();
```

On the other hand, if you do intend to include a relationship while also filtering results based on a condition on that included relationship, use `.include()` in conjunction with `.join().where()`, i.e.:

```ts
this._userRepository
    .getMany()
    // Include posts in results.
    .include(u => u.posts)
    // Use .join rather than .joinAlso to actually filter user results by post criteria.
    .join(u => u.posts)
    .where(p => p.archived)
    .isTrue();
```

Finally, if you intend to include a relationship while filtering those included relationships but not filtering out any entities of the base type, then use `.joinAlso().where()` in order to perform a `LEFT JOIN` as opposed to an `INNER JOIN`.

```ts
this._userRepository
    .getMany()
    // Include posts in results.
    .include(u => u.posts)
    // Use .joinAlso rather than .join to perform a left join to filter posts but not filter users.
    .joinAlso(u => u.posts)
    .where(p => p.archived)
    .isTrue();
```

### Joining Foreign Entities
Join from an unrelated entity using `from()`. A simple example of this is not easily provided, so see examples below for further guidance on using this method.

```typescript
this._songRepository
    .getAll()
    .join(s => s.artist)
    .where(a => a.id)
    .equal(artistId)
    .from(UserProfileAttribute)
    .thenJoin(p => p.genre)
    // ...
```

### Comparing Values With Joined Entities
Perform comparisons with values on joined entities by calling `from()`, `join()`, and `thenJoin()` after calling `where()`, `and()`, or `or()`.

```typescript
this._userRepository
    .getAll()
    .join(u => u.posts)
    .where(p => p.recordLikeCount)
    .thenJoin(p => p.category)
    .greaterThanJoined(c => c.averageLikeCount);
```

The following query conditions are available for comparisons on related entities' properties:

`equalJoined(selector: (obj: P) => any)`: Determines whether the property specified in the last "where" is equal to the specified property on the last joined entity.

`greaterThanJoined(selector: (obj: P) => any)`: Determines whether the property specified in the last "where" is less than the specified property on the last joined entity.

`greaterThanOrEqualJoined(selector: (obj: P) => any)`: Determines whether the property specified in the last "where" is greater than or equal to the specified property on the last joined entity.

`lessThanJoined(selector: (obj: P) => any)`: Determines whether the property specified in the last "where" is less than the specified property on the last joined entity.

`lessThanOrEqualJoined(selector: (obj: P) => any)`: Determines whether the property specified in the last "where" is less than or equal to the specified property on the last joined entity.

`notEqualJoined(selector: (obj: P) => any)`: Determines whether the property specified in the last "where" is not equal to the specified property on the last joined entity.

### String Comparison When Comparing Values With Joined Entities
Note that although non-joined string comparisons defaults to case-insensitive comparison, due to a lack of type reflection in JavaScript, the opposite is true for comparing values with joined entities. Therefore, the default behavior when using the above methods is to perform a case sensitive comparison, so you must specify `matchCase: false` when using the above methods if you wish to perform a case-insensitive comparison.

```ts
// Perform a case-insensitive comparison rather than the default case-sensitive when comparing joined entity's properties.
equalJoined(x => x.property, { matchCase: false });
```

### Including or Excluding Results Within an Inner Query
To utilize an inner query, use the `inSelected()` and `notInSelected()` methods. Each takes an inner `ISelectQuery`, which is obtained by calling `select()` on the inner query after its construction and simply specifies which value to select from the inner query to project to the `IN` or `NOT IN` list.

The following example is overkill since, in reality, you would simply add the condition that the post is not archived on the main query, but consider what is going on within the queries in order to visualize how inner queries in `typeorm-linq-repository` work.

Consider a `PostRepository` from which we want to get all posts belonging to a certain user and only those that are not archived. The outer query in this instance gets all posts belonging to the specified user, while the inner query specified all posts that are not archived. The union of the two produces the results we want.

```typescript
this._postRepository
    .getAll()
    .join(p => p.user)
    .where(u => u.id)
    .equal(id)
    .where(p => p.id)
    .inSelected(
        this._postRepository
            .getAll()
            .where(p => p.archived)
            .isFalse()
            .select(p => p.id)
    );
```

This next example is more representative of an actual situation in which an inner query is useful. Consider an application in which users set up a profile and add Profile Attributes which specify genres of songs they do NOT wish to hear; that is, the application would avoid songs with genres specified by the user's profile.

Given the following models:

`Artist.ts`
```typescript
import { Column, Entity, OneToMany, PrimaryGeneratedColumn } from "typeorm";
import { Song } from "./Song";

@Entity()
export class Artist {
    @PrimaryGeneratedColumn()
    public id: number;

    @Column({ nullable: false })
    public name: string;

    @OneToMany(() => Song, (song: Song) => song.artist)
    public songs: Song[];
}
```

`Genre.ts`
```typescript
import { Column, Entity, OneToMany, PrimaryGeneratedColumn } from "typeorm";
import { SongGenre } from "./SongGenre";

@Entity()
export class Genre {
    @PrimaryGeneratedColumn()
    public id: number;

    @Column({ nullable: false })
    public name: string;

    @OneToMany(() => SongGenre, (songGenre: SongGenre) => songGenre.genre)
    public songs: SongGenre[];
}
```

`Song.ts`
```typescript
import { Column, Entity, ManyToOne, OneToMany, PrimaryGeneratedColumn } from "typeorm";
import { Artist } from "./Artist";
import { SongGenre } from "./SongGenre";

@Entity()
export class Song {
    @ManyToOne(() => Artist, (artist: Artist) => artist.songs)
    public artist: Artist;

    @OneToMany(() => SongGenre, (songGenre: SongGenre) => songGenre.song)
    public genres: SongGenre[];

    @PrimaryGeneratedColumn()
    public id: number;

    @Column({ nullable: false })
    public name: string;
}
```

`SongGenre.ts`
```typescript
import { Entity, ManyToOne, PrimaryGeneratedColumn } from "typeorm";
import { Genre } from "./Genre";
import { Song } from "./Song";

/**
 * Links a song to a genre.
 */
@Entity()
export class SongGenre {
    @ManyToOne(() => Genre, (genre: Genre) => genre.songs)
    public genre: Genre;

    @PrimaryGeneratedColumn()
    public id: number;

    @ManyToOne(() => Song, (song: Song) => song.genres)
    public song: Song;
}
```

`User.ts`
```typescript
import { Column, Entity, OneToMany, PrimaryGeneratedColumn } from "typeorm";
import { UserProfileAttribute } from "./UserProfileAttribute";

@Entity()
export class User {
    @Column({ nullable: false })
    public email: string;

    @PrimaryGeneratedColumn()
    public id: number;

    @Column({ nullable: false })
    public password: string;

    @OneToMany(() => UserProfileAttribute, (profileAttribute: UserProfileAttribute) => profileAttribute.user)
    public profile: UserProfileAttribute[];
}
```

`UserProfileAttribute.ts`
```typescript
import { Entity, ManyToOne, PrimaryGeneratedColumn } from "typeorm";
import { Genre } from "./Genre";
import { User } from "./User";

/**
 * An attribute of a user's profile specifying a genre that user does not wish to hear.
 */
@Entity()
export class UserProfileAttribute {
    @ManyToOne(() => Genre)
    public genre: Genre;

    @PrimaryGeneratedColumn()
    public id: number;

    @ManyToOne(() => User, (user: User) => user.profile)
    public user: User;
}
```

Now, consider the following query from which we want to gather all songs by a certain artist that a certain user wants to hear; that is, songs by that artist that do not match a genre blocked by the user's profile.

```typescript
this._songRepository
    .getAll()
    .join(s => s.artist)
    .where(a => a.id)
    .equal(artistId)
    .where(s => s.id)
    .notInSelected(
        this._songRepository
            .getAll()
            .join(s => s.artist)
            .where(a => a.id)
            .equal(artistId)
            .from(UserProfileAttribute)
            .thenJoin(p => p.genre)
            .where(g => g.id)
            .join(s => s.songGenre)
            .thenJoin(sg => sg.genre)
            .equalJoined(g => g.id)
            .from(UserProfileAttribute)
            .thenJoin(p => p.user)
            .where(u => u.id)
            .equal(userId)
            .select(s => s.id)
    );
```

### Selection Type
Calling `select()` after completing any comparison operations uses the query's base type. If you wish to select a property from a relation rather than the query's base type, you may call `select()` after one or more joins on the query.

```typescript
this._songRepository
    .getAll()
    .join(s => s.genres)
    .thenJoin(sg => sg.genre)
    .select(g => g.id);
```

### Ordering Queries
You can order queries in either direction and using as many subsequent order statements as needed.

```typescript
this._userRepository
    .getAll()
    .orderBy(u => u.lastName)
    .thenBy(u => u.firstName);
```

You can use include statements to change the query's property type and order on properties of that child.

```typescript
this._userRepository
    .getAll()
    .orderByDescending(u => u.email)
    .include(u => u.posts)
    .thenByDescending(p => p.date);
```

### Using Query Results
Queries are transformed into promises whenever you are ready to consume the results.

Queries can be returned as raw promises:

```typescript
this._userRepository
    .getById(id)
    .toPromise();
```

Or invoked as a promise on the spot:

```typescript
this._userRepository
    .getById(id)
    .then(user => {
        // ...
    });
```

Or, using ES6 async syntax:

```typescript
const user = await this._userRepository.getById(user);
```

### Using TypeORM's Query Builder
If you encounter an issue or a query which this query wrapper cannot accommodate, you can use TypeORM's native QueryBuilder.

```typescript
this._userRepository.createQueryBuilder("user");
```

## Persisting Entities
The following methods persist and remove entities from the database:

```typescript
// Creates one or more entities.
create(entities: T | T[]): Promise<T | T[]>;

// Deletes one or more entities by reference or one entity by ID.
delete(entities: number | string | T | T[]): Promise<boolean>;

// Updates one or more entities.
update(entities: T | T[]): Promise<T | T[]>;
```
